# Thursday, August 26

In class 2 I gave a high-level overview of
[how the web works](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/How_the_Web_works).
I also described the assignment process in more detail, provided some additional
information about git, and ran through an example assignment that was
essentially the same as assignment 1.

The git document in the course GitHub repo has been updated with some additional
background and a list of commonly used git commands.

## Assignments

The basic flow for an assignment is:

1. I email you an assignment link
2. Click the link, which takes you to GitHub and asks you to accept the
   assignment.
3. Accept the assignment, and GitHub creates a new “repository” -- a project
   containing some files for you to work with. This is also where you’ll be
   submitting your work.
4. “Clone” the assignment using `git` or `GitHub Desktop`. This will
   download the repository from GitHub into a directory on your computer.
5. Open a terminal or command prompt and change to the repository directory. For
   example, GitHub Desktop usually puts files in a directory like
   `C:\Users\you\Documents\GitHub\assignment-1-youruser`.
6. Create a new branch in the repository. Initially, you’ll be in the main
   branch. With the `git` program, you can run `git checkout -b some-new-branch`
   to create a new branch.
6. Do what the assignment README says. Do all of your work in the repository
   directory on your computer (where `git` or `GitHub Desktop` downloaded the
   repo to).
7. Commit your changes to your branch.
8. Push your branch to GitHub.
9. Open a “pull request” (PR) from your branch to the `main` branch.
10. If you need to make any changes before the due date, make them in the branch
    on your computer, commit the changes, and push. You do not need to open a
    new PR; pushing to your branch will automatically update an open PR.
