# Tuesday, October 12

We spent the first part of class reviewing the exam. Overall, most people did
pretty well. The questions that seemed to give people the most trouble dealt
with objects and functions. Some useful concepts to review would be:

- Accessing nested object properties
- Looping through object properties
- Different ways to declare functions

## The DOM

Next we moved on to talking about the DOM. The DOM is the **Document Object
Model**, which is basically a JavaScript representation of an HTML document. A
DOM document is, like an HTML document, a tree structure. An HTML document is
made up of tags, while a DOM document is made up of **nodes**.

Note that "nodes" can represent several things: an HTML tag, a bit of text, or a
comment. Nodes that represent HTML tags are called **elements**.

You can access the DOM through a `document` global property. Document is an
object implementing the
[Document](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document) interface.
It provides a large number of properties and methods. Two useful properties are
`head`, which is a reference to the `<head>` element in a document, and `body`,
which is a reference to the `<body>` element.

Elements are instances of the
[Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element) class, a
subclass of the [Node](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Node)
class. Like Document, Element provides a large number of properties and methods.

## Walking the DOM

A document is a tree, and the DOM API provides methods for moving around in the
tree. The Element class has a `children` property that will return a list of an
element's direct children (the nodes nested within it).

Element has `firstChild` and `lastChild` properties that point to the the first
and last nodes contained by an element. You can also use `nextSibling` and
`previousSibling` to access nodes on the same level as a given node. For
example, `node.firstChild` will give you the first child of a node.
`node.firstChild.nextSibling` will give you the sibling of the first child,
which is the _second_ child.

Nodes also have a `parentNode` property that points to the parent of a node.

Element also has a parallel set of element properties, like `firstElementChild`
and `nextElementSibling`. These properties work like the non-element versions,
except that they skip over non-element nodes. If you have a series of 3 nodes,
A, B, and C, where A and C are elements and B is a text node, `A.nextSibling`
will point to `B`, the node that comes immediately after A. However,
`A.nextElementSibling` will point to `C`, because it points to the next node
after A that is an element.

## Finding elements

Walking the document tree will let you get to any element, but it can be
tedious. Luckily the DOM provides a number of methods for finding specific
elements or groups of elements in a document. The two we will use the most are
[querySelector](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/querySelector)
and
[querySelectorAll](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/querySelectorAll).

The `querySelector` method is part of the Element and Document classes, so you
can call it on `document` or on any Element reference. It takes a CSS selector
as an argument and returns the first matching node. The search starts at the
node on which you call `querySelector`, and includes any descendants of that
node. For example, if you call `document.body.querySelector('h2')`, you'll get
back the first `<h2>` element in the document body.

The `querySelectorAll` method is very similar to `querySelector`. However,
rather than returning the first matching element, it returns a list of all
matching eleents. If you call `document.body.querySelectorAll('h2')`, you'll get
_all_ the `<h2>` elements in the document body.

Note that the list returned by `querySelectorAll` is _array-like_, but is
**not** an array. You can loop through it, and get it's length, but it won't
support most array methods like `push`, `pop`, or `slice`.

## Element properties

Elements have a number of other properties not related to navigating the DOM.
Three that we looked at are
[innerHTML](http://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/innerHTML),
[textContent](http://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Node/textContent),
and [style](http://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLElement/style).

The `innerHTML` property returns the HTML content of a node as a string. If you
have an element reference `list` that points to a `<ul>` element in the DOM with
two list items, the `list.innerHTML` property would give you a string like
`<ul><li>Item one</li><li>Item 2</li></ul>` (a string of HTML tags). You can
also use `innerHTML` to set the HTML content of a node. Saying
`someNode.innerHTML = '<p>This is some text.</p>';` would replace the contents
of `someNode` with a paragraph elmeent containing the text "This is some text.".

The `textContent` property returns the unformatted text content of a node and
any nodes it contains. Unlike `innerHTML`, `textContent` only deals with raw
unformatted text, not HTML tags. Setting `textContent` will replace the contents
of a node with the given text.

The `style` property provides access the the CSS styles of an Element. It is
analogous to the `style` attribute you might set on an HTML tag. Using the
`style` property you can examine any styles applied to an element, and also
update them. For example, saying `someNode.style.marginBottom = '1em'` would set
the bottom margin of `someNode` to 1em, just as if you'd set a
`style="margin-bottom: 1em"` attribute on the corresponding HTML element.

Elements also have a number of other properties, some of which mirror their HTML
tags. For example, an HTML tag can have an `id` attribute; this translates to an
`id` property on a DOM ndoe. An HTML tag's `class` attribute translates to a
`className` property on DOM nodes.
