# Thursday, November 4

Today we reviewed the solution for assignment 9 and what we covered about React
in the last class. After that I discussed JSX, a dialect of JavaScript popular
in the React community.

The scratch files for this class are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211104_Thursday).

## What is JSX?

[JSX](https://reactjs.org/docs/introducing-jsx.html) is a superset of
JavaScript. It is based on JavaScript, and any valid JS file is a valid JSX
file, but JSX adds some additional syntax on top of JavaScript.

The main benefit of JSX is convenience. Writing complex UIs using React's API is
certainly doable, just like writing complex pages with DOM methods is doable.
Creating a short list in HTML is fairly simple:

```html
<ul id="count-list">
  <li>One</li>
  <li>Two</li>
</ul>
```

Doing the same thing in JavaScript is more cumbersome:

```js
const list = document.createElement('ul');
list.id = 'count-list';
const item1 = document.createElement('li');
item1.textContent = 'One';
list.append(item1);
const item2 = document.createElement('li');
item2.textContent = 'Two';
list.append(item2);
```

In the same way, JSX is generally shorter and easier to read than the equivalent
standard JavaScript code. Consider this:

```js
function List() {
  return React.createElement(
    'ul',
    {
      id: 'count-list',
    },
    [React.createElement('li', {}, 'One'), React.createElement('li', {}, 'Two')]
  );
}
```

vs

```js
function List() {
  return (
    <ul id="count-list">
      <li>One</li>
      <li>Two</li>
    </ul>
  );
}
```

You can tell from a glance what the second example above is returning, while you
might have to stop and think for a few seconds about the first one.

## Using JSX

Since JSX isn't normal JavaScript, you can't use it directly in a browser. If
you try to load or import a JSX file you'll get an error. To use a JSX file in a
browser, it must first be converted to standard JavaScript using a build tool.
Usually this is [Babel](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/).

Once you have Babel setup, you can run it on a file, like
`babel src/Component.jsx`, and it will print out the equivalent JavaScript. You
can have Babel write its output to a file using command line arguments.

Babel will be setup in any assignments we do, so you won't have to worry about
setting it up yourself. A common practice in projects using babel is to put the
source files (at least your JSX files) in the `src/` directory, and have Babel
write out the compiled JavaScript into a `public/` directory that already
contains the `index.html` file, styles, and any JavaScript scripts that don't
need to be compiled.

## Writing JSX

Writing JSX looks a lot like writing HTML in a JavaScript file, but there are a
few oddities. JSX, like HTML, assumes that anything between an opening and
closing tag is text. If you want to use JavaScript values, like variables, in
JSX content, you have to wrap them in curly braces. For example:

```js
function Component() {
  const val = 23;
  return <span>{val}</span>;
}
```

Another is that tag attributes in JSX can have types other than string. For
example:

```js
return (
  <div
    id="box1"
    style={{
      width: '100px',
      height: '100px',
      background: 'blue',
    }}
  />
);
```

Here we're assigning an object as the value of the div's `style` attribute, and
a string as the value of its `id` attribute.

## Mixing JSX and regular JavaScript

JSX components can be mixed with regular JavaScript. Since JSX files have to be
built before they can be loaded, the will _be_ regular JavaScript when they're
actually used. That means that a driver script written in regular JS can import
and use components originally written in JSX (that have been compiled to JS).
