# Tuesday, September 14

In this class we reviewed the styling assignment and talked a bit about
accessibility. The scratch files from this class are [here](./20210914).

Accessibility, commonly abbreviated in the web development world as “a11y”, is
concerned with making websites accessible to as many people as possible. Many
developers only focus on making a page visually stylish, and assume all users
will navigate with a mouse. However, some users may navigate using a keyboard or
voice control, and many users may not be able to ”see” your page at all! Luc
Luckily, there are a number of steps you can take to make a page accessible to
as many people as possible.

One common alternative means of reading a page is with a screen reader such as
VoiceOver (Mac) or Narrator (Windows). These tools parse the content of a page
and verbally describe it to the user. For this process to work, the internal
structure of a page needs should provide as much information as possible about
the page content. A few ways to do this include:

- Provide alt text for images using the `alt` attribute. This text that isn’t
  displayed in a browser, but will be read out loud by screen readers.
- Provide
  [ARIA](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA) labels
  for non-image resources such as tables and sections. Much like alt text, aria
  labels often aren’t visible on a page, but will be read out loud by screen
  readers.
- Enclose your content with the proper “landmark” tags. These tags denote the
  major content sections of a page, such as the header (`<header>`), main
  content (`<main>`), and footer (`<footer>`).
- Use semantically meaningful tags wherever possible. For example, rather than
  using `div` tags to denote sections of a page, use `<section>` tags. A `div`
  tag doesn’t really say anything about what’s in it; a `div` is a box with no
  intrinsic meaning. A `section`, on the other hand, indicates logical `section`
  of content on a page.

Another issue common to many pages, particularly ones trying to be visually
stylish, is contrast. Many users may have trouble reading the text on a page if
the text color is too close to the color of the page behind it. For example,
white text in a medium gray background has fairly low contrast. Having to read a
lot of that kind of text can cause eye strain, and may be very difficult for
some users.

Resources:

- [Intro to Web Accessibility](https://www.w3.org/WAI/fundamentals/accessibility-intro/)
- [Accessibility (Google)](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/accessibility)
- [Accessibility (MDN)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility)
- [HTML and Accessibility](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Accessibility/HTML)
