# Tuesday, November 23

Today I reviewed the assignment 11 solution and what we covered of unit testing
last time, then continued with some additional testing techniques, including the
basics of React component testing.

The scratch files from today's lecture are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211123_Tuesday).

## React components

The first step in testing a react component is to render it. There's actually a
fair amount involved in rendering a React component: you need a DOM document
(which doesn't normally exist in Node) and a container element in that document,
and you need to call React's `renderComponent` function to render your component
into that container.

As with most tedious jobs, someone has written a library to make the task
easier:
[@testing-library/react](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro/).
This library provides a number of useful features for testing React components,
one of which is a `render` function that be used to easily render a component:

```js
import { render } from '@testing-library/react';
import MyComponent from './MyComponent.jsx';

test('MyComponent renders', () => {
  const { container } = render(<MyComponent />);
});
```

The `render` function handles setting up a document, creating a container, and
rendering the given component into it. It returns an object containing several
values, one of which is the container the component was rendered into. Using
this `container` property, you can use normal DOM functions to query the
structure of the rendered component. For example, if you wanted to check that
MyComponent contained a single button with the text 'Ok', you could say:

```js
test('MyComponent renders', () => {
  const { container } = render(<MyComponent />);
  // find all buttons and make sure there's only one
  expect(container.querySelectorAll('button')).toHaveLength(1);
  // find the first button (i.e, the only button) and check its text content
  expect(container.querySelector('button')).toHaveTextContent('Ok');
});
```

> 💡The `toHaveTextContent` matcher is not a part of Jest, it's from an
> extension library called
> [@testing-library/jest-dom](https://github.com/testing-library/jest-dom).
> There are a number of libraries written by various authors that extend Jest's
> default functionality.

This example illustrates why using the most specific applicable matcher can be
worthwhile. You could make simple true/false assertions for all of your tests,
like:

```js
test('MyComponent renders', () => {
  const { container } = render(<MyComponent />);
  // find all buttons and make sure there's only one
  expect(container.querySelectorAll('button').length === 1).toBe(true);
  // find the first button (i.e, the only button) and check its text content
  expect(container.querySelector('button').textContent === 'Ok').toBe(true);
});
```

This may seem simpler because you don't need to remember as many matchers.
However, the matchers provide better error messages and can handle more
situations than the simple test. If the component didn't have a button, this
test would emit a generic error message saying something like "cannot access
textContent on null":

```js
expect(container.querySelector('button').textContent === 'Ok').toBe(true);
```

This test, on the other hand, would more clearly point out that the assertion
expected a Node but instead received a null value:

```js
expect(container.querySelector('button')).toHaveTextContent('Ok');
```

## Snapshot tests

Making explicit checks for a few elements in component render test is always a
good idea, but Jest also provides a means for catching more subtle issues:
[snapshot tests](https://jestjs.io/docs/snapshot-testing). The first time a
snapshot test is run, it records the value it's given to a file. Every time the
test is run after that, it compares the value it's given to the value recorded
in the snapshot. If there are any differences, the test fails.

Snapshot testing works well for component tests because you can save a string
representation of a rendered component, such as an HTML string, as the snapshot.
The string describes the complete state of the rendered component, including all
of the elements and their attributes, such as class names. A change to any part
of a component will cause a snapshot to fail.

Of course, sometimes you'll intentionally change a component, such as to add a
new feature or change a style. In that case, you can tell Jest to update its
snapshots using a command line option (`-u`).

This is the standard process for using snapshots. You ensure that your component
is rendering, store a snapshot, and then re-verify that things are working as
intended if a snapshot ever fails (and update the snapshot).

## Firing events

Basic render tests are a lot like function tests -- you call a function (in this
case a component render function) and check the output. However, React
components often do more than just render their props. For example, the Search
component you wrote for Assignment 10 contained buttons that did things when
clicked.

To interact with controls in a component, `@testing-library/react` provides a
`fireEvent` function. To use it, call `fireEvent[event]` on an element. For
example, to click a button, you could do:

```js
import { render, fireEvent } from '@testing-library/react';
import MyComponent from './MyComponent.jsx';

test('MyComponent renders', () => {
  const { container } = render(<MyComponent />);
  const button = container.querySelector('button');
  fireEvent.click(button);
});
```

## Mocking test inputs

Being able to fire events is good, but how do you check that a component did
what it was supposed to? That depends on the component. If it was supposed to
make some known change to the document, you would fire the event and then check
the document to see if the change had been made.

In many cases, you'll pass functions into React components that will be called
when certain events occur. For example, you pass a function to a button's
`onClick` attribute that will be called when a user clicks a button. In that
situation, how could you verify that clicking the button did what it was
supposed to?

Jest provides a useful feature for this situation: `jest.fn()`. Calling
`jest.fn()` will create a new mock function. This function can be called like
any normal function, and it will record information about how it's used that can
be examined later in a test.

Assume MyComponent accepts an `updateColor` prop. The value of this prop should
be a function that takes a color name. The function will be called whenever
MyComponent's button is clicked, and will be passed the current value of
MyComponent's `background` prop. To test that the button was working, you could
do something like this:

```js
import { render, fireEvent } from '@testing-library/react';
import MyComponent from './MyComponent.jsx';

test('MyComponent renders', () => {
  const updateColor = jest.fn();
  const { container } = render(
    <MyComponent background="green" updateColor={updateColor} />
  );
  const button = container.querySelector('button');
  fireEvent.click(button);
  expect(updateColor).toHaveBeenCalledWith('green');
});
```

The `updateColor` variable is a mock function. We pass it to MyComponent as the
value of the `updateColor` prop. When the button is clicked, the code in
MyComponent calls `updateColor`, passing it the value of the background prop.
After the button is clicked, the test can make assertions about how
`updateColor` was called to see if the button worked.
