# Thursday, September 2

We started out this class reviewing what we learned about HTML during the last
class, and then covered some new tags:

* `<code>` - renders monospace text inline
* `<pre>` - renders a block of monospace text
* `<blockquote>` - renders a section of text indented and with wide top and
  bottom margins

Tags can have multiple attributes. For example, anchor tags are often given both
an `href` attribute and a `target` attribute, like:

```html
<a href="https://google.com" target="_blank">Google</a>
```

The `target` attribute tells the browser how to open a link. The default is
`_self` and means to open the link in the current window or tab, while `_blank`
means to open the link in a new window or tab.

We also talked about HTML entities. These are alternate representations of
characters, and can be used to “escape” characters in problematic situations.
For example, if you want to render a `<p>` tag on the page so that the user can
see it (because normally tags are invisible), you can replace the opening `<` of
the `<p>` tag with a `&lt;` (“less than”) entity. The `&lt;` entity will render
as a `<`, but will prevent `&lt;p>` from being processed as a `<p>` tag.

Another potentially useful HTML entity is `&nbsp;`, the “non-breaking space”.

Aside from HTML, we also started in on styling (CSS) using the `style`
attribute. The `style` attribute is a normal HTML attribute, but its value is
something else: CSS (another language, distinct from HTML). A `style` attribute
can accept a set of CSS property assignments, which look like
`property1:value1;property2:value2;`. Some examples are:

* `<h1 style="font-weight:normal">Hi</h1>` - a header with a non-bold font
* `<h2 style="background:#f0f0f0">Hi</h2>` - a header with a light gray
  background
* `<p style="padding: 1em;background:#f0f0f0">Hi</p>` - a paragraph with a light
  gray background and with 1em of space between the text and the edges of the
  light gray background box. The size 1em means “1 unit that is the size of
  the font”. If the paragraph font is 12px, then 1em = 12px. If the paragraph
  font is 20px, then 1em = 20px.

The files we created during class are [here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20210902_Thursday/src).
