# Tuesday, November 9

In this class we briefly reviewed JSX, and then looked into React event handling
and forms in more detail.

The scratch files for this class are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211109_Tuesday).

## React components

Some things to remember when creating a React component:

1. If you're using JSX, your component must import React
   ```js
   import { React } from 'https://unpkg.com/es-react';
   ```
2. A functional React component must be a function that accepts a single
   argument (an object of component properties, or "props") and returns a single
   React element. The element it returns may _contain_ many other elements, but
   there must be a single root element (i.e., not an array of elements).

## Compact arrow functions

Arrow functions can be very useful for keeping code compact. A regular function
might look like:

```js
function makeRandom() {
  return Math.random();
}
```

An equivalent arrow function might look like:

```js
const makeRandom = () => {
  return Math.random();
};
```

However, arrow functions can be made even shorter. If an arrow function contains
a single statement, you can leave out the curly braces, like:

```js
const makeRandom = () => Math.random();
```

This is equivalent to both of the functions above. It is a function that, when
called, returns the value of calling `Math.random()`.

## Destructuring assignments

You can assign an object property to a variable like:

```js
const val = someObject.someProperty;
console.log(val);
```

If you want to get some property out of an object and store it in a local
variable with the same name, JavaScript gives you a shortcut:

```js
const { someProperty } = someObject;
console.log(someProperty);
```

In the statement above, after the assignment statement is executed, there is a
local variable named `someProperty` that has the same value as the
`someProperty` property in `someObject`.

## Default exports

We've seen a couple ways to export things, like:

```js
// in myscript.js
export function doStuff() {}

function doOtherStuff() {}
export { doOtherStuff };
```

To use one of these, you'd do:

```js
import { doStuff } from './myscript.js';
```

It's very similar to a destructuring assignment. You're importing all the
exports from `myscript.js`, then picking out just `doStuff` and making it a
local variable (or close enough).

You can also make a "default" export. The default export is what you get if you
import something from a module without using `{}`.

```js
export default function doStuff() {}
// or
function doStuff() {}
export default doStuff;
```

To use a default export:

```js
import doStuff from './myscript.js';
```

## Rendering lists

To render a list in a JSX-based React component, you'll need to generate
elements for each item in the list, like:

```js
const items = ['one', 'two', 'three'];
const myList = (
  <ul>
    {items.map((item) => (
      <li key={item}>{item}</li>
    ))}
  </ul>
);
```

When rendering an array of items, React wants each item to have a unique
[key](https://reactjs.org/docs/lists-and-keys.html#keys) attribute. This isn't
strictly required, but it's a good practice, and it helps React to render lists
more efficiently. The key value should be unique for each list item. In the
example above, where we're rendering a list of unique strings, you can simply
use the string value as the key (i.e., `key={item}`).

Note that you cannot put a for loop or other iterative code between JSX tags. If
you need to do something like create a bunch of list items, you can do something
like the snippet above (use
[Array.map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map)),
or you can create your set of list items separately, like:

```js
const items = ['one', 'two', 'three'];
const listItems = [];
for (const item of listItems) {
  listItems.push(<li key={item}>{item}</li>);
}
const myList = <ul>{listItems}</ul>;
```

## Handling events

To handle events in React, use event handler attributes rather than calling an
`adddEventListener` method. Two events that will be useful are `onClick` and
`onChange`:

```js
<button onClick={() => console.log('clicked!')}>Click me</button>
```

```js
<input
  onChange={(event) =>
    console.log(`input value changed to ${event.target.value}`)
  }
/>
```

You can also create your event handling functions separately from the element
than needs them:

```js
function handleInputEvent(event) {
  console.log(`input value changed to ${event.target.value}`);
}

const input = <input onChange={handleInputEvent} />;
```

## Controlled components

Typically when using forms in React, the form inputs are "controlled". This
means that rather than creating a form element and letting the DOM manage the
element's value, your React code will explicitly manage the elements value. This
generally looks like:

```js
export default function MyComponnent(props) {
  const { val, setVal } = props;
  <input onChange={(event) => setVal(event.target.value)} value={val}>
}
```

In the snippet above, the `val` and `setVal` props are passed into the
component. `val` is the current value of the input, and `setVal` is a function
that the component can call to update the current value of the input.

When a user selects the input and types a character, the `onChange` event
handler is called. This handler gets the current value of the input element and
passes it to `setVal`. `setVal` takes the value and stores it somewhere, then
re-renders MyComponent, passing in the new value as `val`.

(`val` and `setVal` aren't special React props, they're just values used in this
example.)

The end result is that input's value is managed by the React application. The
React app, outside of MyComponent, always has the current value of the input. It
passes this value into MyComponent whenever MyComponent is rendered, and
MyComponent uses the value for the `value` attribute of the `input`. Whenever
the user updates the value by typing a character, MyComponent notifies whoever
rendered MyComponent by calling `setVal` with the new value.
