# Thursday, September 30

Files for this class are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20210930_Thursday).

Today we reviewed the assignment and what we covered about functions last week,
then we moved on to modules, array functions, and a quick overview of
assignment 6.

## Object declarations vs code blocks

Curly braces can be used for object declarations. An object declaration is a
list of property value assignments, like `property: value`, separated by commas:

```js
let cat = {
  species: 'cat',
  color: 'orange',
  weight: 14,
};
```

Curly braces can also be used to denote code blocks. A code block is a list of
code statements, separated by semi-colons:

```js
function printRandomVowels(count) {
  let letters = ['a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u'];
  for (let i = 0; i < count; i++) {
    let index = Math.floor(Math.random() * letters.length);
    console.log(letters[index]);
  }
}
```

You cannot have statements (like `let letters = [ ... ]` or `for (...) { }`) in
an object declaration. You cannot have property assignments (like
`letters: ['a', 'b', 'c']`) in a code block.

## Global scope

JavaScript code can exist in different scopes. The scope of a function or
variable affects what other code can see it. For example, the scope of a
variable declared in a function is only that function.

```js
function myFunc() {
  let myVar = 'hello';
  console.log(myVar); // <-- myVar can be seen here
}

console.log(myVar); // <-- myVar cannot be seen here
```

In general, a variable declare with `let` or `const` is scoped to the closest
set of enclosing `{ ... }`. If it’s in a function, it's only visible in that
function. If it’s in an `if` statement, it's only visible in that if statement.

There is also something called the `global` scope. Things in the global scope
are visible to all code all the time. In assignment 5, the `data` object was in
the global scope. Your script could see `data` even though you didn't declare
`data`. When you create a variable or a function in a script and it’s not some
enclosing set of `{ ... }`, it ends up in the global scope.

The global scope can be useful for sharing data between scripts. One script can
make global variables and functions, and then other scripts can use those
variables or functions. However, the global scope is a limited resource. You can
only have one value with a given name in the global scope. If one script makes a
global function called `calculateTotal`, no other script can create a global
function named `calculateTotal`. (Technically a second script _could_ make a
`calculateTotal` global function, but it would override the existing one, and
would likely break the first script since `calculateTotal` would be different.)

## Modules

A JavaScript module is a script file that that can export functions and values
for other modules to use, and that can import functions and values from other
modules. There's nothing special about a module -- it uses the same extension as
a normal JavaScript file (`.js`) and has the same kind of code. What makes a
JavaScript script a module is how the browser loads and interprets it.

You can tell a browser to load a script as a module, or to run inline code as a
module, by adding a `type="module"` attribute to the script tag:

```js
<script type="module">
  console.log('This is a module');
</script>

<script>
  console.log('This is not a module');
</script>
```

When a browser loads a script as a module, the script follows some different
rules. The biggest difference is in how the script affects the global scope. In
non-module scripts, any variable or function that isn’t in some enclosing code
block (`{ ... }`) ends up in the global scope. In a module, variables and
functions are confined to the script file. To get values out of a module, you
must use `export`. Other scripts can then `import` those values.

Export works like this:

```js
// script1.js

// Declare and export in one step
export function printRandom1() {
  console.log(Math.random());
}

function printRandom2() {
  console.log(Math.random() * 2);
}

// Export a function or variable declared earlier in the script
export { printRandom2 };
```

Imports work like this:

```js
import { printRandom1 } from './script1.js';
printRandom1();

// You can import multiple things from a single script, and you can import
// things from multiple scripts.
import { getValue, printValue } from './script2.js';
printValue(getValue());
```

In a browser, a module script can load code from other scripts without needing
to use a `<script src="..."></script>` tag.

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script type="module">
      import { printRandom1 } from './script1.js';
      printRandom1();
    </script>
  </head>
</html>
```

The browser will load `script1.js` because the script module imports something
from it.

## Arrow functions

You’ve seen function declarations and function expressions using the `function`
keyword:

```js
// function declaration
function func1() {
  ...
}

// functin expression
const func2 = function () { ... }
```

Functions can also be declared using an “arrow” syntax, like:

```js
const func3 = () => { ... }
```

This syntax is very similar to a function expression, except that it doesn’t use
the `function` keyword, and uses an arrow (`=>`) to separate the arguments from
the function body. Arrow functions behave differently from functions declared
using `function` in several ways, but none of them matter for us at the moment.

One difference between arrow functions and regular functions is that arrow
functions can be declared without using curly braces if the function contains
only a single statement or expression.

```js
let printValue = (value) => console.log(value);

// Prints the value 'a' to the console
printValue('a');
```

When an arrow function is declared without braces, its return value will be the
value of the expression to the right of the arrow. In the example above, the
return value of `printValue` is the return value of `console.log()` (which is
just `undefined`). In the example below, the return value of `getRandom` is the
return value of `Math.random()`, which is a random number.

```js
let getRandom = () => Math.random();

// Calls `getRandom`, which returns the value it gets from calling
// Math.random(). That value is then stored in `randomVal`.
let randomVal = getRandom();
```

Arrow functions are a bit shorter than functions created with `function`, so
they are often used when calling functions or methods that must be passed other
functions, like the array methods described below.

## Array methods

Arrays have a number of useful methods.

`push` adds a value to the end of an array:

```js
let arr = [1, 2, 3];
arr.push(4);
// arr is [1, 2, 3, 4]
```

`pop` removes an element from the end of an array and returns it:

```js
let arr = [1, 2, 3];
let lastVal = arr.pop();
// arr is [1, 2]
// lastVal is 3
```

`forEach` must be passed a function, and will call that function for each
element of the array. The function will be passed three arguments: the current
value, the index of that value, and the array itself.

```js
let arr = ['a', 'b', 'c'];
arr.forEach((value) => console.log(value));
// prints each letter to the console
```

`filter` is used to filter an array. It must be passed a function that takes
up to 3 arguments (value, index, array) and that returns `true` or `false`. This
function will be called for each element of the array. `filter` will return a
new array containing the elements that the filter function returned `true` for.

```js
let arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let smallVals = arr.filter((val) => val < 3);
// smallVals is [1, 2]
```

`map` is used to transform an array. It must passed a function that takes up to
3 arguments (value, index, array) and that returns a new value. This function
will be called for each element of the array. `map` will return a new array
containing the values returned by the map function.

```js
let arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let stringVals = arr.map((val) => `${val}`);
// stringVals is ['1', '2', '3', '4', '5']
```

`slice` returns a new array containing some or all of the elements of a given
array. It takes up to 2 arguments. The first argument is a starting index in the
array, and the second argument is an ending index. `slice` will return elements
from the array from the starting index up to the (but not including) the ending
index. If an ending index isn't provided, slice takes elements from the start
index to the end of the array. If neither argument is provided, slice returns a
copy of the array.

```js
let arr1 = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let arr2 = arr1.slice(1, 4);
// arr2 is [2, 3, 4]

let arr3 = arr1.slice(1);
// arr3 is [2, 3, 4, 5]

let arr4 = arr1.slice();
// arr4 is [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```
