# Tuesday, November 16

Today I reviewed assignment 10 and then covered the basics of state management
and component composition in React.

The scratch files from today's lecture are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211116_Tuesday).

## Destructuring assignments

A destructuring assignment is a way to concisely break an array or object into
individual variables.

### Arrays

To destructure an array, you assign an array to an array of variable names,
like:

```js
const animals = ['lion', 'tiger', 'bear'];
const [a, b, c, d] = animals;
console.log(a); // prints 'lion'
console.log(b); // prints 'tiger'
console.log(c); // prints 'bear'
console.log(d); // prints 'undefined'
```

The second line creates new variables `a`, `b`, `c`, and `d` from the array
`animals`. The names of the new variables **does not matter**. The only thing
that matters is their order. The first variable (`a`) gets the first item in the
array. The second variable gets the second item, and so on.

If there are more variables than items in the array, the extra variables don't
get values (they're `undefined`). If there are fewer variables than items in the
array, the variables still get the corresponding values from the array. For
example, with `const [a, b] = animals`, `a` would still get 'lion' and `b` would
get 'bear'.

### Objects

Destructing an object looks similar, but with curly braces:

```js
const employee = { firstName: 'Bob', lastName: 'Smith', id: '12345' };
const { firstName, lastName, id } = employee;
console.log(firstName); // prints 'Bob'
```

In this case the order of the variable names on the left doesn't matter, but
**the names do matter**. Each variable on the left will be assigned the value of
the matching property in `employee`. For example, The variable `firstName` gets
the value of `employee.firstName`. If there are names on the left that don't
correspond to properties in the object on the right, they will be undefined.

You can also partially destructure an object:

```js
const { firstName, ...other } = employee;
console.log(firstName); // prints 'Bob'
console.log(other); // prints '{ lastName: 'Smith', id: '12345' }'
```

With this style of destructuring, normal variables on the left get the
corresponding property values from the object on the right. The variable
starting with `...` serves as a catchall for all the properties that weren't
specifically named. The same kind of catchall destructuring also works for
arrays.

## State management

One of the benefits of functional components is that they're easy to reason
about. Props go in and elements come out, and that's mostly it. You'll always
get the same elements out for a given set of prop values.

If that were all there was to it, functional components would be pretty limited.
For example, consider the CollapsiblePane component from class. This is
basically a box that shows a title at the top and content in the middle. By
default, the box is collapsed, and only the title shows. If you click the title,
the box expands and shows the rest of the content it contains. If you render the
pane with new content, it updates without resetting itself (it stays expanded or
collapsed).

For this to work, CollapsiblePane needs to remember between renders whether it's
supposed to be expanded or collapsed. Without some way to remember its state,
the pane would re-collapse every time it was rendered. Functions don't normally
remember values between calls (that's one of the defining features of a
function). To allow a functional component to remember values between renders,
React provides the `useState` function.

```js
import { React, useState } from 'https://unpkg.com/es-react';

export default function CollapsiblePane(props) {
  const { children, heading } = props;
  const [expanded, setExpanded] = useState();

  const classes = ['collapsible-pane'];
  if (expanded) {
    classes.push('collapsible-pane-expanded');
  }

  return (
    <div className={classes.join(' ')}>
      <h4 onClick={() => setExpanded(!expanded)}>{heading}</h4>
      {children}
    </div>
  );
}
```

In the example above, CollapsiblePane uses the `expanded` state variable to
remember whether it's expanded or collapsed. If the component is re-rendered
with a new heading, or with new content (`children`), it will remain expanded or
collapsed until the user clicks the heading, which will toggle the expanded
state.

`useState` returns 2 values: a state variable and a setter function for that
variable. A state variable can contain any type of value (number, string,
object, etc.). A component can have many state variables, it just needs to call
`useState` for each one.

```js
export default function CollapsiblePane(props) {
  const [expanded, setExpanded] = useState();
  const [hidden, setHidden] = useState();
```

## Composing components

In a class-based system, you can create a new component from an existing one
using inheritance.

```js
class MyButton extends Button {
  // custom stuff
}
```

The inheriting class will get all the functionality from the parent class, along
with whatever functionality the inheriting class itself adds.

With functional components, code and data are shared using _composition_. One
functional component simply calls another functional component, modifying its
props, return value, or both.

```js
function Button(props) {
  return <button onClick={prosp.onClick} style={props.style}>{props.label}</button>
}

function GreenButton(props) {
  return <Button {...props} style={{ color: 'green' }} />
}
```

In the example above, GreenButton is extending Button through composition.
GreenButton creates a new Button, passing it a custom style property, and
returns the resulting element. GreenButton _is_ a Button, in that it has all the
functionality of Button, but it's not _inheriting_ from Button to get that
functionality.

Note the ` {...props}` notation. This is a bit like in-place destructuring.
Assume GreenButtons `props` has the value:

```js
{
  onClick: () => console.log('clicked'),
  label: 'Foo'
}
```

Then `<Button {...props }/>` is the same as:

```js
<Button onClick={() => console.log('clicked')} label="Foo" />
```

The `{...props}` is expanded in-place into separate attribute (prop) values.
