# Tuesday, October 26

In this class we reviewed the assignment (but not the solution to the
assignment), and then talked about events and forms.

The files for this class are in the [playground repo](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211026_Tuesday).

## Events

I reviewed the event content from last Thursday, giving a few more examples. The
main new event-related concept we talked about was **event delegation**. The
idea behind event delegation is that rather than adding individual listeners to
elements, you can add a single listener to a parent element that will handle all
events.

It could look something like this:

```html
<div id="buttons">
  <button id="quack">Quack</button>
  <button id="bark">Bark</button>
  <button id="meow">Meow</button>
  <button id="growl">Growl</button>
  <button id="moo">Moo</button>
</div>
```

```js
const buttons = document.querySelector('#buttons');
buttons.addEventListener('click', (event) => {
  // event.target is the element that actually emitted the event.
  // tagName is a property on all elements that returns the tag name (like,
  // "button", "img", "div", etc.) of the element in all caps.
  // Since we added a listener to a div, a click event will be emitted if the
  // user clicks **anywhere** in the div, not just on a button.
  if (event.target.tagName === 'BUTTON') {
    // In this example, just print the ID of the button that was clicked.
    console.log(`clicked ${event.target.id}`);
  }
});
```

This works because most DOM events "bubble", which means that when an element
emits an event, any listeners on the event are called, and any listeners on the
element's parent, and any listeners on that elements parent, up to the root of
the document. So in the case above, we can add a listener to the `#buttons` div,
and clicks on anything within that div will trigger the listener. Then we can
just use a simple script to figure out _what_ was clicked and take appropriate
action.

This can be a bit more complicated than simply attaching a listener to each
button. However, in many cases (like the case above) it will be less repetitive,
and it's much more efficient. Creating many (like, hundreds) of listeners in a
page, which is easy to do with a very complex page, can slow down the browser.
Using event delegation you can get by with fewer listeners.

## Forms

A basic HTML form is one or more form elements in a `<form>` tag. For example,
this is a simple form containing a single text input:

```html
<form>
  <input name="name" />
  <input name="servings" type="number" />
  <button>Save</button>
</form>
```

The `form` element is an invisible container, much like a `div`, that is used to
contain form elements. However, a `form` is different from a `div` -- it
understands many different attributes, and it has some form-related
functionality that can be triggered with a button.

### Inputs

Form inputs are mostly variations of the `<input>` tag. By default `input` is a
text field, but you can use the
[`type`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input#input_types)
attribute to configure it to deal with numbers, dates, email addresses, and many
other things.

You can read the value of an input by usign it's `value` property, like:

```js
// assuming we're using the form from the earlier example
const input = document.querySelector('#recipe-name');
console.log('Name: ' + input.value);
```

The value of the `value` property will always be a string, no matter the type of
the `input`. If you know it should be something else, you'll need to convert it
yourself.

```js
// assuming we're using the form from the earlier example
const servingsInput = document.querySelector('#recipe-servings');

// This won't work -- if the user entered '4' into the servings field, the
// code would print "Servings + 2: 42"
console.log('Servings + 2: ' + (servingsInput.value + 2));
const servings = Number(servingsInput);

// This will work printing "Servings + 2: 6"
console.log('Servings + 2: ' + (servings + 2));
```

It's typical to give inputs a `name` attribute. This identifies the input in the
form. Just like the fields in a paper form would all have logical names (the
"first name" field, the "address" field, the "birthdate" field, etc.), `name`
attributes on form inputs lets them be easily identified. Inputs can also have
`id` attributes, and there are times that will be useful, but they should almost
always have `name` attributes.

### Labels

It's often a good ideal to label your form elements. For that, use the `<label>`
tag. `label` is an inline text element, kind of like `span`, although a label is
general bold.

You can associate a label with an input by either putting the input inide the
label or by using the `for` attribute on the label.

```js
<label>
  Recipe name:
  <input id="recipe-name">
</label>

// or

<label for="recipe-name">Recipe name:</label>
<input id="recipe-name">
```

Putting a label next to its input without using either of the techniques above
would probabaly look fine, but when the label is associated with an input,
clicking the label will focus the input, just as if the input itself were
clicked.

### Buttons

We've seen `<button>` several times before. Buttons are often used in forms to
submit or reset them. One thing to keep in mind when using buttons in forms is
that you should always specify the `type` attribute:

```js
<form>
  <input id="recipe-name">
  <button type="button">Save</button>
</form>
```

This is just a quirky implementation detail of JavaScript. When a button is
placed in a form, it's default type is "submit" (just like an `input`'s default
type is "text"). When a "submit" button is clicked in a form, it triggers the
form's default "submit" behavior, which will try to send data somewhere and then
refresh the page. When you're writing a JavaScript-based web app, you generally
do _not_ want the page to refresh, because that will essentiall restart your
program.

To prevent this default form behavior (which you will usually want to do unless
you have a specific reason not to), make sure to always set the `type` attribute
for buttons in a form to "button". With `type="button"`, a button within a
form can be clicked without causing a page refresh.

### Checkboxes

One type of input is the "checkbox":

```html
<input type="checkbox">
```

Checkboxes don't let you type in values, you can only check or uncheck them.
That would suggest a boolean (true/false) value, but as with all inputs, a
checkbox's value is a string. You can set the value with the `value` attribute,
like:

```html
<input id="happy-check" type="checkbox" value="happy">
```

A checkbox will always have the same value, whether it's checked or not. The
thing that changes is another property, the `checked` property. A checkbox's
`checked` property is a boolean, and will be `true` if the checkbox is checked
and `false` if not. So, you can use the `checked` and `value` properties
together:

```js
const checkbox = document.querySelector('#happy-check');
if (checkbox.checked) {
  console.log(checkbox.value);
} else {
  console.log('');
}
```

The code above will print the checkbox's value if it's checked, or an empty
string otherwise.

### Collecting form data

The simplest way to collect form data is just to query for all the fields in a
form and store their data in an object.

```js
const form = document.querySelector('#my-form');
const inputs = form.querySelectorAll('input');
const values = {};

for (const input of inputs) {
  // this is where `name` attributes are really useful
  values[input.name] = input.value;
}

// prints an object that contains all your form data
console.log(values);
```
