# Thursday, September 23

In today's lecture we went over the solution to assignment 4, covered more
JavaScript, and got a preview of assignment 5.

The scratch files from the lecture are available
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20210923_Thursday/src).

## Assignment 4

Most people got through assignment 4 well enough. A couple recurring issues I
saw:

* Putting a `<section>` inside the existing section `<div>`, or wrapping the
  existing `<div>` in a `<section>`. Neither of these are invalid HTML, but
  the `div` isn't necessary in either case. Both `div` and `section` are
  simple container elements, so there's no need to have both.
* Not making ARIA text descriptive. When adding an ARIA attribute to an element,
  such as when you give a `section` tag an `aria-label` attribute, the value of
  the ARIA attribute should be _meaningful_. The goal isn't just to put some
  random string there, but to put a string that describes the element's content.
  For example, reasonable ARIA labels for the `section` containing the
  ingredients content might be "Ingredients" or "Ingredients list".

## JavaScript

### Variable types

There are two ways to declare a variable: `let` for variables you want to be
able to reassign and `const` for constants. JavaScript variables can also be
declared with `var`, but variables declared this way have some non-intuitive
behaviors, so you shouldn't use `var`.

Note that `const` doesn't mean a value can't be changed, it just means that a
variable can't be reassigned. For example, if you say `const arr = [1, 2, 3]`,
you can't later say `arr = 5` or `arr = [2, 2, 2]`. You _can_, however, modify
the value that is stored in `arr`. For example, you can say `arr[1] = 5`, which
will change the value of `arr` to `[1, 5, 3]`. The `arr` variable still
contains the same array that was originally assigned to it, but the contents of
that array were modified.

### Object and array access

Typically, array elements are accessed with square brackets, like `arr[0]`, and
object properties are accessed with a dot, like `obj.foo`. However, object
properties can also be accessed using square brackets, like `obj['foo']`. The
dot notation is really just a slight shortcut -- `.foo` is simpler than
`['foo']`.

Since arrays are a type of object, they also support both the dot and bracket
notation. You can assign a value to an arbitrary property on an array, just like
with a normal object:

```js
const arr = [1, 2, 3];
arr.someProperty = 'foo';
```

### Operators

JavaScript has a similar set of operators as Java and C/C++. Additionally, it
has a “strict equality” operator, `===`, that ensures the types of values match
(the standard equality `==` will coerce values to a common type before doing a
comparison, which can lead to hard-to-diagnose bugs).

The “ternary” operator, `? :`, is like a compact if-statement. It can lead to
shorter code, but overuse can also lead to hard-to-read code.

## Assignment 5

Assignment 5 asks you to write some code in a script file that will read data
from a `data` object, compute some values, and add the values to a new property
on the `data` object. It involves some very basic math, array access, and object
access.
