# Thursday, November 18

Today I reviewed the assignment 10 solution, discussed one more point about
React state management, talked about unit testing, then briefly previewed
assignment 11.

The scratch files from today's lecture are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211118_Thursday).

## Initializing state variables

Last time we talked about using `useState` to create state variables.

```js
export default function SearchField(props) {
  const [input, setInput] = useState();
  const [data, setData] = useState();

  async function search() {
    const params = new URLSearchParams();
    params.set('term', input);
    const response = await fetch(`/search?${params}`);
    setData(await response.json());
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <input value={input} onChage={(event) => setInput(event.target.value)} />
      <button onClick={search}>Search</button>
    </div>
  );
```

This looks reasonable enough -- we have a controlled input and a button. When
you click the button, the component fetches from a search endpoint. However,
there's a problem here.

If the user clicks Search before typing anything, `input` will be `undefined`.
When a URLSearchParam value is `undefined`, it is turned into the literal string
`'undefined'` when the params object is converted to a string, meaning we'd be
fetching `/search?term=undefined`. That's probably not what we want, because as
far as the server knows we'd be searching for the string `'undefined'`.

To prevent this situation from coming up, we can give state variables an initial
value. In our case, we could say

```js
const [input, setInput] = useState('');
```

This will initialize `input` with the value `''` (empty string). Passing a value
to `useState` will only initialize the state variable, it won't reset it when
the function is next rendered (which is good). Now if the user hits the Search
button without typing anything, we'll end up fetching `/search?term=`, which is
what we _should_ be fetching when the input is empty.

## Unit testing

The goal of unit testing is to verify that "units" of code (functions, classes,
components) are behaving as intended. A test for a function might check that,
given some known input, a function returns the proper value. A test for a React
component might check that the component renders properly.

For example, given a function `add` in a `utils.js` file that is supposed to
take two numbers as inputs and return the sum, a simple test might look like:

```js
import { add } from './utils.js';

const answer = add(1, 2);

if (answer !== 3) {
  console.log('fail');
} else {
  console.log('pass');
}
```

'Pass' and 'fail' are standard terms used to say whether the code being tested
did or didn't do what it was supposed to. If a test passes, everything worked as
expected. If a test fails, something isn't working right.

While you can write tests like the one above, various testing frameworks have
been created to make writing tests easier. One of the most popular right now in
the JavaScript community is [Jest](https://jestjs.io/docs/getting-started).
Using Jest, the above test could be written like:

```js
import { add } from './utils.js';

test('add adds two numbers', () => {
  expect(add(1, 2)).toEqual(3);
});
```

Using a framework like Jest gives you a couple of advantages. One is that the
tests are generally easier to read. In the code above, it's pretty obvious that
something is being tested, and it's a reasonable guess as to what the expected
behavior of the code is. In the earlier example you can definitely tell that a
function is being imported and run, but it's less obvious what's going on
overall.

## Tests and assertions

Jest provides a couple of syntaxes for writing tests; we're going to use the
`test` function. This function takes two arguments, the name of a test and a
function that actually runs the test. If the function throws an exception, it
fails. If it doesn't it passes.

```js
test('add adds two numbers', () => {
  expect(add(1, 2)).toEqual(3);
});
```

In general, a test will take some action and then make one or more "assertions"
about the result. In the test above, the action is to call `add(1, 2)`, and the
assertion is to check whether the answer is 3.

Just also provides a couple of syntaxes for making assertions. We're using the
`expect` syntax, which works like `expect(something).toX(expectedValue)`. There
are
[a number of possible `toX` functions](https://jestjs.io/docs/using-matchers)
(Jest calls them "matchers"): `toBe`, `toEqual`, `toBeGreaterThan`,
`toBeUndefined`, `toHaveLength`, `toThrow`, etc. Each one is making a specific
assertion about the value `something`.

What `something` is and what specific assertion you use depends on what you're
trying to test. For example, when testing a function that adds numbers, you'll
probably want to try adding numbers and then check that the output is the
correct value, in which case `something` will be a number and `toEqual` is a
reasonable comparison.
