# Thursday, October 14

Today we started out reviewing the DOM material from Tuesday, which mostly
covered accessing the DOM, and then talked more about ways to update the DOM.

## Updating existing nodes

We covered two main ways to update existing nodes. To change a node's content,
you can use `textContent` or `innerHTML`. Setting `textContent` will set the
content of a node to a given string. Setting `innerHTML` will actually create
child nodes in a node rather than just setting the content to a string. For
example, if you have a reference to a `<div>` and you set its `innerHTML` to
`<h2>Hi</h2>`, the div will contain an `<h2>` element, which will have text
content of "Hi".

## Adding new nodes

We also discussed how to create new nodes. One way is through `innerHTML`. That
will let you create new DOM nodes within an existing node by having the browser
parser a string of HTML. While that works, and is simple in many cases, it's not
something you should do frequently. Using strings to construct DOM content is
error prone, and using strings from external sources, such as strings typed by a
user, is not particularly safe -- a user could mistype something, or enter some
HTML you don't actually want to display in yoru app.

A better way to create and add nodes to your page is to use the DOM element
creation function `createElement`. This function will create an element from a
given tag name. Once you've created the element, you can add more nodes to it,
and/or modify its properties (add classes, set an ID, update its styles, etc.).

Eventually you'll probably want the new element to show up on the page. For that
to happen, you need to add the new element to the document. For that you'll need
a reference to a parent element, such as a particular element on the page, or
`document.body`. This element will contain your new element. Once you have a
reference to a containing element, use `.append()`. So, if you wanted to add a
new element directly to the document body, you could say
`document.body.append(myNewNode)`.

## Timers and intervals

Lastly, we talked a bit about `setTimeout` and `setInterval`, which let you
schedule code to run at some future time. Both functions take an arbitrary
number of arguments. The first two arguments are a function and a time. In
`setInterval`, the time is how often the function should be called (it's called
repeatedly). In `setTimeout`, the time is how long to wait before calling the
function (it's only called once). In either case, the code is scheduled to run
_asynchronously_. That means that when your code is running, the browser won't
wait around for your timer to fire or your interval to stop -- it will shcedule
the functions passed to `setTimeout` or `setInterval` and then move on.

```js
console.log('start');
setTimeout(() => console.log('delayed'), 1000);
console.log('done');
```

If the code above is run, the browser console will print `start`, then `done`,
then, a second later, `delayed`.

We can use `setInterval` to make animations. In the `setInterval` callback,
create or update some content in the DOM. Set the interval to a reasonably low
number (50-100 ms). When your code runs, the interval function will do your DOM
update every few tens of milliseconds. You could, say, change the location of a
circle on the page every time the interval function runs, generating a bouncing
ball animation.
