# Tuesday, October 19

In this class we reviewed `setTimeout` and `setInterval` and discussed some more
complex use cases for each. I introduced the `fetch` function, Promises, and the
`await` keyword.

## Timeouts and intervals (again)

We saw that timers and intervals can be nested within each other, and that they
can also control each other (to an extent). For example:

```js
let i = 0;
const interval = setInterval(() => {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
}, 500);

setTimeout(() => {
  clearInterval(interval);
}, 5000);
```

When you create an interval with `setInterval`,  you must pass it
at least 2 arguments: the first is a function that will be called 1 during each
interval, and the second is the interval time. The `setInterval` function
returns a value (a "token") that can be used to stop the interval. In the
example above, we create an interval that will, every 500 milliseconds, print an
integer value and increment the value. 

The code above _also_ creates a timeout that will run after 5000 milliseconds.
When this timeout runs, it will call `clearInterval` on the interval token we
got from `setInterval`. That will cause the interval to stop running. So, when
the above code runs, it will print out an integer every half second for 5
seconds, and the stop.

An interval can also cancel itself:

```js
let i = 0;
const interval = setInterval(() => {
  console.log(i);
  i++;
  if (i > 50) {
    clearInterval(interval);
  }
}, 500);

```

The code above will print and increment an integer every half second until the
integer's value is more than 50, at which point the interval function will
cancel the interval, meaning the interval function won't be called again. Note
that clearing (cancelling) an interval does **not** stop the interval function
if it's currently running, it just means the interval function won't be called
again.

## Fetch and Promises

Sometimes a web app may want to request data from a website. To do that, we can
use the `fetch` function. In its simplest form, that looks like:

```js
const fetchPromise = fetch('/some/url');
```

`fetch` takes a URL and returns a Promise. A Promise represents a value that
isn't know yet, but will be at some point in the future. The idea is that
requesting data from a website may take an indeterminate amount of time, and
most apps won't want to wait around for it to finish. You call `fetch` to start
a request and get back a Promise that you can use to get the result later, then
get on with whatever else you needed to do.

When using Promises directly, you can register a callback to be called when the
thing the Promise is waiting on finishes, kind of like how you register a
callback for `setTimeout`. To do that you use the `then` method on the Promise:

```js
fetchPromise.then((response) => {
  // do stuff with response
});
```

When the `fetch` call is done and it has a response, it the callback you
registered with `then` will be called, and it will be passed the response as its
first argument. You can request the actual data that was returned by the request
by calling methods on the response object.

You need to know what _kind_ of data the request should be receiving when
getting data from a response. If you request a text file, you can use
`response.text()` to get the response data. For example:

```js
const promise = fetch('/index.html');
promise.then((response) => {
  response.text().then((text) => {
    // prints the content of the `index.html` file
    console.log(text);
  });
});
```

This can be flattened a bit by considering that: 

1. The return value of `Promise.then()` is another Promise,
2. When a Promise is returned _in_ a `then()` callback, the followon Promise
   will resolve with the value of the returned Promise

That basically means you can do:

```js
const promise = fetch('/index.html');
const textPromise = promise.then((response) => {
  // return the Promise returned by `response.text()`
  return response.text();
})
textPromise.then((text) => {
  // prints the content of the `index.html` file
  console.log(text);
});
```

or more compactly:

```js
fetch('/index.html')
  .then((response) => {
    // return the Promise returned by `response.text()`
    return response.text();
  }).then((text) => {
    // prints the content of the `index.html` file
    console.log(text);
  });
```
