# Tuesday, November 2

Today I gave a short refresher on assignment 9, and then spent the rest of the
class period discussing React.

The files for todays class are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211102_Tuesday);

## What is React?

[React](https://reactjs.org) is a library for building user interfaces. It
provides a way to make reusable UI components, from simple elements like buttons
to more complex things like rich text editors. It is currently the most popular
client-side JavaScript development library.

React _only_ provides tools for making user interfaces. It does not provide
tools for a lot of other things you typically need to make a fully featured app.
This is both a strength (because it keeps React relatively simple) and a
weakness (because it means the developer has to go find appropriate libraries to
do the things the React doesn't do).

## Using React

Using React requires at least two JavaScript libraries -- React itself and, in
our case, ReactDOM. The base React library can work in other environments
besides an HTML document, so the code that works with the DOM is in a separate
library.

To get started with React, you need to load or import the React libraries you
need. For example:

```html
<script type="module">
  import { React, ReactDOM } from 'https://unpkg.com/es-react';
</script>
```

This snippet imports React from `unpkg.com`, an online package repository.

Once you've loaded React, you can use two functions to use it:
`React.createElement`, which is kind of like `document.createElement`, and
`ReactDOM.render`, which will add React elements to the DOM.

The following snippet uses React to create a `div` in a container element.

```js
const container = document.querySelector('#some-container');
ReactDOM.render(React.createElement('div'), container);
```

React's `createElement` function also allows you to provide attributes for the
element you're creating, like:

```js
ReactDOM.render(
  React.createElement('div', {
    id: 'my-div',
    clasName: 'rounded',
  }),
  container
);
```

Mostly the attribute names agree with the element attributes, but CSS classes
are specified with `className` rather than `class`.

`createElement` also allows child elements to be rendered:

```js
ReactDOM.render(
  React.createElement(
    'ul',
    {
      clasName: 'bordered',
    },
    [
      React.createElement('li', null, 'Item 1'),
      React.createElement('li', null, 'Item 2'),
    ]
  ),
  container
);
```

In the snippet above, a `ul` element is created that contains two `li` elements,
one with the text 'Item 1' and one with 'Item 2'.

## Making components with React

Rendering DOM elements with React doesn't look all that impressive. In fact, it
doesn't look _too_ different from rendering things using normal DOM methods.
React starts to look more interesting when you create reusable components.

A simple React component is just a function that is called with an object of
configuration properties ("props") and that returns a React element (which may
contain other React elements).

```js
function List(props) {
  // assume props.items is a list of strings
  const listItems = props.items.map((item) => {
    return React.createElement('li', null, item);
  });

  return React.createElement('ul', null, listItems);
}

export default List;
```

In the example above, we've created a List component that, when called with a
list of strings, will return a `<ul>` element containing `<li>` elements.
Assuming the component was in a file './List.jsx', you would use it like:

```js
import List from './List';
ReactDOM.render(React.createElement(List, { items: [
  'item 1', 'item 2', 'item3'
]}, container);
```

This would render

```html
<ul>
  <li>item 1</li>
  <li>item 2</li>
  <li>item 3</li>
</ul>
```

`createElement` will instantiate the List component, passing it the props
object, and will add the resulting React element to the container.
