# Thursday, October 28

Today we went over assignment 8, reviewed the forms content from last time, and
I went over how to send data to a server using query strings. We finished by
going over the next assignment.

Files from today's lecture are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20211028_Thursday).

## Form behavior

The originnal purpose of a form was to collect input from the user and send it
somewhere. If you add a button to a form and don't give it a `type="button"`
attribute, the button will be a _submit_ button, and clicking it will invoke the
form's default behavior.

When a form is submitted, it makes a GET request to the URL in its `action`
attribute, or to the server it was loaded from if no `action` is provided. For
example, if the following form were on a page loaded from `http://localhost/`,
submitting would cause the browser to try to load the page at
`http://localhost/`.

```html
<form>
  <input name="first_name">
  <input name="last_name">
  <button>Submit<button>
</form>
```

If the form had an `action="hello"` attribute, submitting it would cause the
browser to try to load `http://localhost/hello`.

Of course, just loading a page wouldn't be very exciting; you can already do
that with an `<a>` tag. When the form is submitted, it also packages up all the
values of its named inputs and adds them to the request address as a **query
string**. Assuming a user entered "Sam" and "Smith" into the fields in the form
above, submitting the form would make a request like:

```
http://localhost/?first_name=Sam&last_name=Smith
```

The end part, `?first_name=Sam&last_name=Smith`, is the query string. It is
essentialy metadata. It doesn't directly affect what page is loaded -- the
browser is requesting `http://localhost`, and that's what the server will give
it. However, the query string acts as additional data that the server can use
when handling the request.

## Managing forms with JavaScript

In modern web apps, we often don't want the page to reload whenever a form is
submitted. To make a page work that we, we can use JavaScript to work with the
form data instead of using the default form behavior.

The first step is to make any buttons in the form have `type="button"`
attributes. This essentially makes them act like simple buttons rather than form
submit buttons.

When the user clicks a button to save the form, we need to get the data out of
the form and into a
[URLSearchParams](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/URLSearchParams)
object. There are various ways to do that. For very small forms, you can just
access an input directly:

```js
const form = document.querySelector('#my-form');
const input = form.querySelector('#input-id');
const params = new URLSearchParams();
params.set(input.name, input.value);
```

For forms with more fields you can use a loop to loop through the inputs:

```js
const form = document.querySelector('#my-form');
const inputs = form.querySelector('input');
const params = new URLSearchParams();
for (const input of inputs) {
  params.set(input.name, input.value);
}
```

An even easier way to get form data into a search params object is with [FormData](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/FormData):

```js
const form = document.querySelector('#my-form');
const data = new FormData(form);
const params = new URLSearchParams(data);
```

The reason we want the data in a URLSearchParams object is because that makes it
easier to send to a server using a query string. With a URLSearchParams object
called `params`:

```js
const response = await fetch(`/some_url?${params}`);
```

Note that we must include the `?`. Without the `?`, we would be changing the
destination of the URL rather than adding some extra metadata to it.
