# Tuesday, September 28

The scratch files for this assignment are
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20210928_Tuesday).

## Assignment review

We started out to day with a hint session for the current assignment. Some key
bits:

- Your script must read all the values it needs from properties on the `data`
  object. The script should not contain any numeric constants (like `12`).
- Your `<script>` tag must come _after_ the script in `index.html` that declares
  `data`. The browser runs scripts in the order it sees them in the browser. If
  your script tag comes _before_ `data` is declared, your script will not be
  able to see or modify the `data` object.
- To access the `data` object, you don't have to do anything special.
- To access a property on the `data` object, use dot notation, like
  `data.servings`.
- Remember, accessing a property on an object simply gives you access to
  whatever value is stored for that property name. For example, the value of
  `data.servings` is `12`, because in `index.html`, the `data` object was
  created with a `servings` property having the value 12. Similarly, the value
  of `data.ingredients` is an array of ingredient objects.
- To add a property to an object, just say something like
  `data.someNewProperty = someValue`. This is saying
  `(object).(property name) = (value)`. Note that for this to work, `object` has
  to actually _be_ an object, not an undefined value. For example, you cannot
  immediately say `data.output.servings = data.servings` in your script, because
  until you've created it, there is no `output` on `data`. `data.output` will be
  `undefined`, and you can't do `undefined.servings`.

## While loops

I discussed `while` and `do-while` loops. These are similar to `for` loops, in
that they're loops, but they are suited to different kinds of problems than
`for` loops.

A while loop is simpler than a for loop -- it is just:

```js
while (condition) {
  // code to run if the condition is true
}
```

`while` loops can't automatically iterate through arrays like `for-of` loops,
and they can't automatically manage a loop-control variable like a standard
`for` loop. You can use while loops to iterate through arrays, and you can
manage a loop control variable yourself, it's just a bit more work with a
`while` loop than with a `for` loop.

Where `while` loops really shine is with indefinate loop conditions. `for` loops
are great when you know how many times you're going to need to loop. A
`for-each` loop runs once for each item in an array. A `for` loop runs once for
each value of its loop control variable, until the condition is met. While loops
are useful when you _don't_ know how many times your loop will need to run. For
example, you might write a program that asks the user for a command, does the
command, and then asks the user for another command, continually, until the user
enters "quit". The ask-run-ask cycle would normally be in a loop -- you'd just
keep looping until the user enters "quit". This isn't well suited to a `for`
loop, because you don't know beforehand how many times you'll need to loop. It's
perfect for a `while` loop, though, which will just keep looking until its
condition is false.

## Semi-colons

Semi-colons in JavaScript are mostly optional, but you should always use them
anyway, just to avoid the few cases where there can be confusion over what code
means without a semi-colon present.

## Functions

Most of the class time was spent discussing functions.

A function is a named block of code that can be executed on-demand by writing
its name followed by parentheses. Functions can take arguments and can return a
single value (although they don't have to return anything). We might have a
function `makeRandom` that returns a random number like this:

```js
function makeRandom() {
  return Math.random();
}
```

A function can be called by putting paretheses after its name, like:

```js
let randomValue = makeRandom();
```

or

```js
console.log(makeRandom());
```

Functions can be declared in multiple ways in JavaScript. Two of the most common
are "function declarations", like

```js
function makeRandom() {
  ...
}
```

and "function expressions", like

```js
let makeRandom = function () {};
```

Functions can take zero or more arguments. Unlike Java or C, JavaScript doesn't
really care if you call a function with more or fewer arguments than the
function expects. We could say `makeRandom(1, 2, 3)` and the function would work
fine; the arguments would simply be ignored (because the fucntion doesn't expect
any arguments).

Functions in JavaScript are first class values. That means a function is a value
just like a number or a string. As we saw above, a function an be assigned to a
variable, like `let makeRandom = function () { ... }`. You can also pass a
function into another function as an argument. If we have a function that makes
random values, we could pass it to another function that prints random values:

```js
let makeRandom = function () {
  return Math.random();
};

let printRandom = function (count, getRandomVal) {
  for (let i = 0; i < count; i++) {
    console.log(getRandomVal());
  }
};

printRandom(10, makeRandom);
```

In the code above, `printRandom` is a function that takes two arguments, a
number of random numbers to print (`count`) and a function that returns a new
random number (`getRandomVal`). When we call `printRandom`, we have to supply
values for these two arguments.
