# Thursday, September 9

In this class we reviewed assignment 2 and the CSS material we discussed on
Tuesday, and we covered more CSS.

The files we created during this class are available
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20210909_Thursday).

## Containers

The `body` element is an element like any other, nested inside the `html`
element. Both the `html` and `body` elements can be styled.

Divs can be used as containers to apply styles, such as margins and padding, to
groups of elements on a page.

Element sizes will change as their containers change size. For example, if the
browser window is shrunk, the body element will also shrink (assuming its
content can also shrink). The sizes of elements can be fixed with `width`, or
bounded with `max-width` and `min-width`.

Using `margin`, `padding`, and `max-width`, you can make content that will be
horizontally centered in a large browser, and will shrink as the browser is
shrunk.

## Overflow

When a container gets smaller than its content and the content can’t shrink, the
content will overflow. This means that the content can extend outside the
borders of the container.

Overflow can be managed using the `overflow` CSS property. `overflow: hidden`
will cut off any overflow. `overflow: auto` will allow content to be scrolled
horizontally and/or vertically.

If the borders of a container are rounded using `border-radius`, the content may
stick outside of the rounded borders. This can be handled by setting
`overflow: hidden` on the container, or by rounding the corresponding borders of
the content.

## Variables

CSS supports variables. Their names must start with `--`, like
`--pre-color: red`. Variables can take any CSS value, like `1px`, `green`, or
`solid 1px black`. Variables are used with `var()`, like
`color: var(--pre-color)`.

Variables have the same kind of inheritance and scoping rules as other CSS
properties. If a variable is set on the body element, any element within the
body (which is all visible elements) can use the variable. If a variable were
set on the `ingreds-section` div, it would only apply to that `div` and the `h1`
and `ul` within it, not to the other `div` or its contents.

```html
<div id="ingreds-section">
  <h1>Ingredients</h1>
  <ul>
    <li>one</li>
    <li>two</li>
  </ul>
</div>

<div id="steps-section">
  <h1>Steps</h1>
  <ol>
    <li>one</li>
    <li>two</li>
  </ol>
</div>
```

CSS variables can be overridden just like other CSS properties. When a variable
is overridden, the new value applies to the element where the value was
overridden and to any contained elements.
