# Thursday, October 21

## await

Promises are handy, but an even easier way to use functions that return Promises
is to use the `await` keyword:

```js
const response = await fetch('/some/url');
```

The `await` keyword makes execution pause until the Promise returned by `fetch`
is resolved (i.e., the fetch completes). So these two are doing the same thing,
but the one using `await` looks simpler.

```js
const response = await fetch('/some/url');
console.log(response);

// and

fetch('/some/url').then((response) => {
  console.log(response);
});
```

One quirk of `await` is that if you want to use `await` in a function, you
**must** declare the function as `async`, like:

```js
async function fetchStuff(url) {
  const response = await fetch(url);
  // ...
}
```

If you call `await` in a function that is not async, you'll get an error.

## JSON

Once you have a response object, you'll probably want to get data out of it.
We looked at the `text` method on Response objects last class. With `await`, you
could get the text with:

```js
const response = await fetch('/some/url');
const text = await response.text();
```

Sometimes the data isn't just text, though. One popular data format used with
JavaScript programs is JSON, which stands for "JavaScript Object Notation". JSON
data is simply a JSON value encoded as a string, like how you'd write it in a
file. The string `'{ "name": "Bob", "weight": 150 }'` represents the JavaScript
object:

```js
{
  name: 'Bob',
  weight: 150
}
```

JSON notation _is_ JavaScript, but with some restrictions. The main one is that
object property names in JSON must **always** be quoted (in normal JS code
property names _can_ be quoted). The other big restriction is that JSON values
can only be only primitive values (strings, number, booleans, null), objects,
and arrays. You can't encode a function or a Date object as JSON.

So, if you've read some text and you know it's JSON, you'll probably want to
turn it into an actual JavaScript object instead of a string. There are two ways
to do that: `JSON.parse` and the `json()` method on Response.

Assuming `data.json` is a file containing `{ "name": "Bob", "weight": 150 }`, 
using `JSON.parse` looks like this:

```js
const response = await fetch('/data.json');
const text = await response.text();
// text is a string like '{ "name": "Bob", "weight": 150 }'
const obj = JSON.parse(text);
// obj is a JS object with `name` and `weight` properties
```

Using `Response.json()` looks like:

```js
const response = await fetch('/data.json');
const obj = await response.json();
// obj is a JS object with `name` and `weight` properties
```

## Events

JavaScript applications can respond to user events such as mouse clicks and
keypresses. To do this, code should attach an event listener to an element of
interest. For example, if you have a page with a button that has an ID of
`save-button`, you could listen for clicks with:

```js
const button = document.querySelector('#save-button');
button.addEventListener('click', () => {
  console.log('save button clicked!');
});
```

The `addEventListener` function can be called on DOM elements. It takes at least
2 arguments: the first should be an event type, such as 'click'. The second
should be a callback function that will be called when the event happens. The
callback will be passed an "event" value as an argument. For mouse clicks we
usually don't care about any event data, we just want to know the click happend.

Another event you may want to listen for is a `keydown` event. This is emitted
by the currently focused element on a page when a key is pressed. For example,
given the button described earlier, we could listen for keydown events with:

```js
button.addEventListener('keydown', (event) => {
  console.log(`user pressed ${event.key}`);
});
```

In the above snippet, we listen for `keydown` events on the button, and then
print out the particular key that was pressed. Note that we're using the
argument to the event handler in this case -- we need the argument to figure out
_which_ key the user pressed.

Remember, for the button to receive keyboard events, it must be "focused". In a
browser, focusable things, such as buttons, become focused either by clicking on
them or by hitting the `tab` key repeatedly until the element of interest
becomes focused (usually shown by adding a blue ring around the focused
element).
