# Tuesday, September 7

Today we talked about CSS (Cascading Style Sheets). CSS is used to style HTML,
to change how it looks.

The files from this class are available
[here](https://github.com/WSU-jcheatham/cs2800-playground/tree/20210907_Tuesday).

## Properties

CSS properties are things like `font-size`, `border`, and `color`. Properties
take values. For example, `font-size: 16px` sets the font size to 16 pixels;
`color: green` sets the color of an element to to green.

Some properties can take multi-part values. The `border` property can be set to
values like `solid`, or `solid black`, or `solid 1px black` -- it takes values
for a style, a color, and a width. Most properties that can take multiple values
have corresponding specific subproperties. You can set `border-style: solid`,
`border-width: 1px`, and `border-color: black`.

You can find a list of common CSS properties and the valid values at
[here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Properties_Reference).

## Setting styles

CSS properties can be applied to elements in 3 ways:

- a style attribute, like `<h1 style="font-family:sans-serif">Hi!</h1>`
- in a `<style></style>` block in the HTML document
- in a separate CSS file that is linked to the HTML document with a `<link>`
  tag, like `<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css">`

Styles set using a `style` attribute apply to the element with the attribute and
to any elements within it.

Styles set in a “stylesheet” (using `<style></style>` tags or in a separate CSS
file) apply to elements that match **selectors**. There are many types of
selectors; the ones we talked about were:

- “type” (tag) selectors, like `h2 { font-family: sans-serif; }`
- “class” selectors, like `.subheading { font-family: sans-serif; }`
- “id” selectors, like `#ingredients-heading { font-family: sans-serif; }`

Class and ID selectors depend on `class` and `id` attributes. A `.subheading`
selector will apply to elements with a `class` attribute containing
`subheading`. A `#ingredients-heading` will apply to the single element (because
IDs must be unique in a document) with an `id` attribute of
`ingredients-heading`. Class attributes can contain multiple class names,
separated by spaces, like `class="heading headinga"`.

As with styles set using a `style` attribute, styles set using selectors apply
to the elements matching the selectors and to any elements contained within
them.

## Specificity and order

With selectors, it’s possible for multiple values of the same property to apply
to an element. When multiple values for a single property apply, the browser
uses specificity and order to decide which property value to use.

The most specific kind of rule that we talked about is the `style` attribute.
The next most specific is an id selector, then a class selector, and finally a
type selector.

```html
<h1 class="heading headinga" id="ingredients-heading">Ingredients</h1>
```

In this case, an `#ingredients-heading` selector is more specific than a
`.heading` selector, which is more specific than an `h1` selector. In this case,
the h1 would be colored orange:

```css
#ingredients-heading { color: orange }
.heading { color: red }
h2 { color: green }
```

Aside from specificity, browsers also use order to decide which rule to apply.
With these two styles, the color associated with `.heading` would be used
because although the `.heading` rule and the `.headinga` rule have the same
specificity, the `.heading` rule comes last.

```css
.headinga { color: blue }
.heading { color: red }
```

The order of class names in a `class` attribute does not matter.

## Positioning

Elements can be positioned in various ways by setting a `position` CSS property.
By default, elements have `static` positioning, which just means they’re at a
predetermined spot in the page.

With `relative` positioning, an element is initially laid out in the same way as
`static` positioning, but it can then be shifted using `top`, `left`, `right`,
and `bottom` properties.

With `absolute` positioning, an element isn’t laid out in the document. It
floats in the upper left corner of the page, and it can then be shifted using
`top`, `left`, `right`, and `bottom` properties.

`fixed` positioning is similar to `absolute`, but an element will stay in the
same place in the viewport when the page is scrolled.

## Units

Dimensional CSS properties, like `width` or `left`, take values with units. Some
units are absolute, like `px` and `pt`. Some are relative to the current font
size, like `em`, `rem`, and `ex`; changing the font sizse for an element will
change any dimensions using these units.
